INTRODUOTION

Ru'rILms ΛΝΒ THE ITALY or ms DAY

Tm: poem in which Rutilius Claudius Namatianus
describes his home-coming from Rome to Gaul is of
interest as well from a literary as from a historical
and a topographical point of view. His lively and
graphic descriptions give a vivid impression of the
places he visited and of the social conditions which,
owing to weak government and the raids of bar—
barians, prevailed in Italy at the time he travelled3
while the high poetical level to which he rises when
a suitable subject presents itself-such as the great-
ness of Rome, the merits of a valued friend, or the
charnis or strangeness of some natural phenomenon
—shows that the light of poetic inspiration was not
yet extinct at the beginning of the fifth century ΑΛ).
“The Return,'' in fact, is not only the most interest-
ing of the Itineraries that have come down to uS, but
is also a poem of considerable merit, in which the
social and political effects of barbarian invasionS,
and also of the growing influence of Christianity,
are sketched in a vivid and attractive form.

At the beginning of the fifth century ΑΔ). the state
of things in both Italy and Gaul—the countries with

